GEP-2627 DNS Configuration - Initial Provisional PR (#2712)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: geps/gep-2627/index.md

# GEP-2627: DNS configuration within Gateway API

* Issue: [#2627](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/2627)
* Status: Provisional

## TLDR

For gateway infrastructure to be valuable we need to be able to connect clients to these gateways. A common way to achieve this is to use domain names/hostnames and DNS. Gateways define listeners that can have assigned hostnames or wildcards.  The guidelines for DNS configuration are a critical piece of service networking, but this is currently not expressible as part of Gateway API.   Instead of leaving this as an exercise for the user to figure out, this proposal attempts to provide options to ease Gateway API operations.

> ## Goals
> * Allow cluster operators to declaratively express which DNS service they want to use with a particular Gateway or Gateway Listener.
> * Provide a mechanism to allow the DNS configuration to be delegated to a chosen controller.
> * Provide a standard CRD-based API with expressive status reporting and remove the need for "loose" APIs such as annotations.
> * Increase portability and supportability between Gateway API implementations and third party controllers offering DNS integration.
> 
> ## Non-Goals
> 
> * Cover more complex DNS routing strategies that come into play for multi-cluster topologies such as round robin, failover, health checks, weighted and geo location with this first pass. Supporting these types of use cases for distributed gateways (e.g., in different regions or multiple gateways for resilience within a region) and offering a form of global load balancing leveraging DNS is a potential future goal.

Reviewer: Based on the discussion with @costinm, I suggest the following changes to make our initial scope a bit more clear:

```suggestion
## Goals
* Provide a way for Gateway API resource owners to mark their resources as relevant for external DNS provisioning
* Ensure that the above method has a way for multiple providers to be present in the cluster and be able to actuate external DNS provisioning requests
* Ensure that any method is based on structured fields and makes the most of `status` on whatever resources are relevant, whether they are existing Gateway API resources or new resources.
* Increase portability and supportability between Gateway API implementations and third party controllers offering DNS integration.
* Clarity on the scope of hostnames under management. (This should _not_ be able to be used to affect the standard in-cluster DNS configuration)

## Non-Goals

* Anything to do with configuring in-cluster DNS. This support is for configuration outside the cluster only.
* Ways to define if the Gateway API resources are allowed to request particular hostnames. These choices should be left to the implementations that actually actuate the requests for hostnames. However, `status` flows should be specified so as to make clear if a hostname provisioning request cannot be performed.
* Cover more complex DNS routing strategies that come into play for multi-cluster topologies such as round robin, failover, health checks, weighted and geo location with this first pass. Supporting these types of use cases for distributed gateways (e.g., in different regions or multiple gateways for resilience within a region) and offering a form of global load balancing leveraging DNS is a potential future goal.
```

## Use Cases

> As a cluster administrator, I manage a set of domains and a set of gateways. I would like to declaratively define which DNS provider to use to configure connectivity for clients accessing these domains and my gateway so that I can see and configure which DNS provider is being used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a cluster administrator, I manage a set of domains and a set of gateways. I would like to declaratively define which gateways should be used for provisioning DNS records, and, if necessary, which DNS provider to use to configure connectivity for clients accessing these domains and my gateway so that I can see and configure which DNS provider is being used.
```

As a cluster administrator, I would like to have the DNS names automatically populated into my specified DNS zones as a set of records based on the assigned addresses of my gateways so that I do not have to undertake external automation or management of this essential task.

As a cluster administrator I would have the status of the DNS records reported back to me, so that I can leverage existing kube based monitoring tools to know the status of the integration.

As a cluster administrator, I would like the DNS records to be setup automatically based on the assigned gateways address and if the IP or hostname changes, I would like for the DNS to update automatically to ensure traffic continues to reach my gateway. 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a DNS administrator, I should be able to ensure that only approved External DNS controllers can make changes to DNS zone configuration. (This should in general be taken care of by DNS system <-> External DNS controller interactions like user credentials and operation status responses, but it is important to remember that it needs to happen).
```

Suggestion to capture some of @costinm's feedback.

# GEP-2627: DNS configuration within Gateway API

* Issue: [#2627](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/2627)
* Status: Provisional

## TLDR

> For gateway infrastructure to be valuable we need to be able to connect clients to these gateways. A common way to achieve this is to use domain names/hostnames and DNS. Gateways define listeners that can have assigned hostnames or wildcards.  The guidelines for DNS configuration are a critical piece of service networking, but this is currently not expressible as part of Gateway API.   Instead of leaving this as an exercise for the user to figure out, this proposal attempts to provide options to ease Gateway API operations.

Reviewer 2: I think this is great, but I would maybe consider a slightly different language at the end, if you're comfortable with it:

```suggestion
For gateway infrastructure to be valuable we need to be able to connect clients to these gateways. A common way to achieve this is to use domain names/hostnames and DNS. Gateways define listeners that can have assigned hostnames or wildcards. The guidelines for DNS configuration are a critical piece of service networking, but this is currently not expressible as part of Gateway API. Instead of leaving this unspecified and having implementations do this in potentially wildly different ways, the purpose of this proposal is to provide a standard way to specify DNS for Gateways.
```

## Goals

> * Provide a way for Gateway API resource owners to mark their resources as relevant for external DNS provisioning

Reviewer 2: I anticipate internal DNS provisioning being important as well. Here's another wording, for your considerations:

```suggestion
* Provide DNS specification for Gateway resources
```

> * Ensure that the above method has a way for multiple providers to be present in the cluster and be able to actuate external DNS provisioning requests

Reviewer 2: What do you think about:

```suggestion
* Support multiple DNS providers and a selection mechanism for Gateways
```

?

> * Ensure that any method is based on structured fields and makes the most of `status` on whatever resources are relevant, whether they are existing Gateway API resources or new resources.

Reviewer 2: I think this collides a bit with the first goal, perhaps:

```suggestion
* Provide Gateway status to communicate the state of provisioned DNS
```

> * Allow cluster operators or infrastructure providers to declaratively express which DNS service they want to use with a particular Gateway or Gateway Listener and have that DNS service interacted with via a controller to provision and configure the defined listener hostnames as DNS names and records based on the addresses assigned to the gateway instances.

Author: Ok will re-work

> * Allow cluster operators or infrastructure providers to declaratively express which DNS service they want to use with a particular Gateway or Gateway Listener and have that DNS service interacted with via a controller to provision and configure the defined listener hostnames as DNS names and records based on the addresses assigned to the gateway instances.

Author: changed

> * Increase portability and supportability between Gateway API implementations and third party controllers offering DNS integration.

Reviewer 2: To me this suggests to me some desire to go beyond just adding specification and status for which users can request DNS configuration for a `Gateway`, and the implementation can go deploy that and report status. This seems to suggest some greater involvement in the actual provisioning tooling, is that what was intended?

Author: The intention is to suggest that with this API I as the user can choose from any provider that supports this API similar to how Gateway API itself works with the `controllerName` in the GatewayClass. So if this API was implemented by `controller A` and I wanted to move to a new implementation in controller B that would be possible and not need a different API to achieve that

> * Clarity on the scope of hostnames under management. (This should _not_ be able to be used to affect the standard in-cluster DNS configuration)

Reviewer 2: I was wondering if you might be able to elaborate on this goal a bit further please?

Author: So it was a while since I looked at this. I am trying to recall. But I believe this was focused around only using the hosts defined in the gateway and not getting involved with or conflicting with the exsting service name dns IE `data.test.svc.cluster.local`

Reviewer 2: Is it OK to pull it, just so there's no ambiguity?

```suggestion
```

OR do you prefer we keep it (maybe a rewording)?

Author: I am ok with removing this 👍

## Non-Goals

> * Anything to do with configuring in-cluster DNS. This support is for configuration outside the cluster only.

Reviewer 2: I'm not opposed to this as a non-goal, except I was wondering if you would please elaborate a bit more on what's driving you to leave it out?

Author: As mentioned above. This could prob be clarified more as it isn't that we can't handle host names and IPs that are not for external use but rather that we wont interfer with things like the service discovery and existing DNS infrastructure in k8s

Reviewer 2: I was considering this overnight and I'm actually starting to think that we should in fact remove this non-goal. My thinking is that since we're pretty much just a spec and status where implementations can use whatever integration (cloud or otherwise) they want to fulfill it and report the status, then in-cluster really shouldn't matter too much from our perspective (except that we _might_ want to provide spec delineation so that a user can request "this DNS name, ONLY intra-cluster", or something like that).

```suggestion
```

Can you be persuaded? Or did you have some strong feelings that it would be a detriment to include in-cluster DNS now?

Author: Yes. I can be persuaded. Coming back to this, I think you are correct and this may have been added based on some questions around security. As you say, this is proposing a spec and defined status and as such can be implemented by multiple providers. So ultimately it is down to the cluster admin and the RBAC system to decide what implementation to use and who they want to allow to create this API. 
One thought though is around the target ref, I guess I had initially only thought of it as targeting a gateway initially are you thinking beyond that ? such as a service ?

Reviewer 2: Well, I think we need to consider the user stories (see https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/2712#discussion_r1951304911) and decide who needs this functionality, and if its safe to provide them.

I think if you're OK with committing the suggestion above, we can consider this comment resolved and then can follow up in that other comment.

> * Ways to define if the Gateway API resources are allowed to request particular hostnames. These choices should be left to the implementations that actually actuate the requests for hostnames. However, `status` flows should be specified so as to make clear if a hostname provisioning request cannot be performed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Providing any upstream hostname validation mechanisms. We can provide status for validation failure, but implementations are responsible for validation.
```

> * Cover more complex DNS routing strategies that come into play for multi-cluster topologies such as round robin, failover, health checks, weighted and geo location with this first pass. Supporting these types of use cases for distributed gateways (e.g., in different regions or multiple gateways for resilience within a region) and offering a form of global load balancing leveraging DNS is a potential future goal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Multi-cluster DNS for multi-cluster ingress solutions
```

Author: So while I like the change here, I wanted a way to communicate that it isn't that it will never be a goal. I guess ultimately this means not as of this GEP but doesn't rule it out for a future GEP

> A a cluster administrator, I would like to have the dns names automatically populated into my specified dns zones as a set of records based on the assigned addresses of my gateways and have the status of the DNS records reported back to me, so that I do not have to undertake external automation or management of this essential task and can leverage existing kube based monitoring tools to know the status of the integration.

Author: will split it up

> As a cluster administrator, I would like the DNS records to be setup automatically based on the assigned gateways address and if the IP or hostname changes, I would like for the DNS to update automatically to ensure traffic continues to reach my gateway. 

Author: `This would have to be configurable, not automatic. Maybe not all hostnames will be in the same IP subnet.`  by this do you mean if a gateway is assigned multiple addresses in its spec, one public and one private for example? 

`I'm not clear on use cases where the IPaddr or hostname changes - can you give an example?`  This is really to indicate that if, the assigned address in the Gateway is changed or new listeners are added, the DNS will be updated appropriately

> As a cluster administrator, I would like the DNS records to be setup automatically based on the assigned gateways address and if the IP or hostname changes, I would like for the DNS to update automatically to ensure traffic continues to reach my gateway. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a cluster administrator, I would like the DNS records to be updated automatically if the `spec` of assigned gateways changes, whether those changes are for IP address or hostname. 
```

Is this a bit clearer?

As a cluster administrator, I would like to have the DNS names automatically populated into my specified DNS zones as a set of records based on the assigned addresses of my gateways so that I do not have to undertake external automation or management of this essential task.

As a cluster administrator I would have the status of the DNS records reported back to me, so that I can leverage existing kube based monitoring tools to know the status of the integration.

As a cluster administrator, I would like the DNS records to be updated automatically if the `spec` of assigned gateways changes, whether those changes are for IP address or hostname. 

> As a DNS administrator, I should be able to ensure that only approved External DNS controllers can make changes to DNS zone configuration. (This should in general be taken care of by DNS system <-> External DNS controller interactions like user credentials and operation status responses, but it is important to remember that it needs to happen).

Reviewer 2: We don't cover any application developer user stories here, we seem pretty focused on the cluster administrator. I anticipate that application developers will in fact will have relevant use cases. What are your thoughts on application developer roles needs here?

Author: I am struggling a little to think of specific application developer use cases around this. What comes to mind is allowing the DNSPolicy to potentially target a HTTPRoute or possibly some form of health check based on the available endpoints behind a service. So as an attempt at a use case "As an application developer, I do not want my service to be exposed via the Gateway until there are pods that are healthy and ready to serve the traffic" ? Did you have anything specific in mind?

Author: will mark as resolved as we haven't had any input here. Things like a default health check based on endpoints are nice to haves but not integral.

> - It is also important that this API can be delegated to controllers other than the Gateway provider. This is because there are existing solutions that may want to support whatever API decided upon. It should not **have** to be a gateway provider that has to integrate with many DNS providers. 

Author: A control plane like istiod or envoygateway, not sure if there is an official term for an Gateway API implementor.

# GEP-2627: DNS configuration within Gateway API

* Issue: [#2627](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/2627)
* Status: Provisional

## TLDR

For gateway infrastructure to be valuable we need to be able to connect clients to these gateways. A common way to achieve this is to use domain names/hostnames and DNS. The guidelines for DNS configuration are a critical piece of service networking, but this is currently not expressible as part of Gateway API. Instead of leaving this unspecified and having implementations likely to do this in different ways, the purpose of this proposal is to provide a standard way to specify DNS for Gateways.

## Goals
* Provide DNS specification for Gateway resources
* Support multiple DNS providers and a selection mechanism for Gateways
* Provide Gateway status to communicate the state of provisioned DNS
* Increase portability and supportability between Gateway API implementations and third party controllers offering DNS integration.

## Non-Goals

* Providing any upstream hostname validation mechanisms. We can provide status for validation failure, but implementations are responsible for validation.

> * Multi-cluster DNS for multi-cluster ingress solutions (at least not as part of the initial API)

Reviewer 2: Make sure to add a little context explaining _why_ these are non-goals.

- It is also important that this API can be delegated to controllers other than the Gateway API provider/implementor. This is because there are existing solutions that may want to support whatever API decided upon. It should not **have** to be a gateway provider that has to integrate with many DNS providers. 

## Conformance Details

TBD

## Alternatives

it is possible to use `external-dns` to manage dns based on HTTPRoutes and Gateways https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/external-dns/blob/7f3c10d65297ec1c4bcc8dd6f88c189b7f3e80d0/docs/tutorials/gateway-api.md. The aim of this GEP is not remove this as an option, but instead provide a common API that could then be leveraged by something like external-dns. 

> The Kuadrant project (full disclosure I work on this project), offers a [DNSPolicy API](https://docs.kuadrant.io/1.2.x/kuadrant-operator/doc/reference/dnspolicy/#dnspolicy) which in part was the basis and inspiration for opening this GEP. The DNSPolicy offered by Kuadrant goes beyond what is outlined here as it also handles multi-cluster ingress and offers common routing options such as GEO and Weighted responses. 

Reviewer 2: You don't need to make a disclaimer for this CNCF project :shrug: 

```suggestion
The Kuadrant project offers a [DNSPolicy API](https://docs.kuadrant.io/1.2.x/kuadrant-operator/doc/reference/dnspolicy/#dnspolicy) which in part was the basis and inspiration for opening this GEP. The DNSPolicy offered by Kuadrant goes beyond what is outlined here as it also handles multi-cluster ingress and offers common routing options such as GEO and Weighted responses. 
```

However this might make more sense under `## References` than under `## Alternatives`?
